# Introduction

In 2008, although I had been an active blogger for three years, I had
only quite recently joined the online messaging service Twitter. It was
a time of discovery and experimentation with new forms of social
communication on the internet. In the German-speaking world in
particular, the number of people prepared to discuss personal matters
online and share their opinions on a larger scale was still very low. To
me, the possibilities were inspiring and at the same time rather scary.

I was aware that data protection was important, and I was seriously
concerned about privacy online. The reasons for my sensitive reaction
were twofold. For one, I was making a living from web programming at the
time, so I had to deal with databases and data models on a daily basis.
This had given me some idea of ​​how powerful they were. At the same
time, I was becoming more and more involved with what is now probably
best described as the German internet movement: a loose network of
hackers, bloggers, and activists, who saw the internet primarily as a
political space, a zone of freedom that was worth preserving. In the
tech scene, there was never any doubt that privacy was a valuable good
that needed extra protection.

At that time I wrote an article about the perils of Twitter.[^1] Two
incidents had inspired me here. One was that Twitter user Matthias Bauer
(@moeffju) would regularly tweet something like ‘So that’s that.
\#Feierabend’ as soon as he finished work. (*Feierabend* being the
German word for closing time, as well as the evening off that follows
it.) Words tagged with the hash symbol in this way are more easily found
in a search on Twitter. A search query for the term ‘Feierabend’ would
spit out all the tweets mentioning this hashtag – and most of them were
from @moeffju.

The other incident was an article written by Twitter user Markus
Angermeier (@kosmar) in which he explained, among other things, how he
sent people birthday wishes on Twitter. He would use the hashtag
\#hpybdy in his congratulatory tweet and in that way create a birthday
calendar of his own along the way.

In my text, I tried to envision the impacts of this kind of behavior.
With sufficiently powerful data analytics, it would have been easy to
create a profile of @moeffju’s working hours. Future clients or
employers could have taken one look at his schedule and used it to draw
conclusions about his motivation or diligence. And @kosmar’s birthday
ritual amounted to compiling a complimentary list of active Twitter
users’ birthdays, even though they might never have made that date
public themselves. Because the date of birth is such an important data
point of identification, @kosmar’s birthday logs were a danger to all
those people who wanted to travel the web anonymously.

Ordinary social practices that seem innocent at first glance may have
unexpected consequences as soon as they are made searchable and
connectable. ‘I do not yet know what all of this means for me and my
tweeting’, was how I ended the article at the time. Today, I know this
was the starting point of a broader contemplation of the matter, which
has, with some diversions, led up to the *10 Rules of the New Game*.

First, I pursued my thoughts about *Kontrollverlust*, the loss of
control in the digital world, only casually.[^2] But when Frank
Schirrmacher, the late editor of German daily *Frankfurter Allgemeine
Zeitung* (FAZ), asked me if I wanted to write a blog for the FAZ website
in early 2010, I knew this would be my topic. My blog was aptly named
‘CTRL-Verlust’. Unfortunately the collaboration ended after about six
months due to a conflict of opinions with the editors, but I continued
the blog by myself at *ctrl-verlust.net*.[^3]

## *Kontrollverlust*: Losing Control 

Current debates about copyright, privacy, failed corporate
communications, state secrets, whistleblowing, or spontaneous network
phenomena like flash mobs and hashtag revolutions, are all
manifestations of one and the same issue: the loss of control over data
on the internet.

*Kontrollverlust* produces an incredible dynamic, making it increasingly
difficult to control who is producing, compiling, copying, or evaluating
which kinds of information. The loss of control takes place on three
levels, which I call *drivers*, because they are the motors powering the
digital tailspin that awaits us.

1.  Every last corner of the world is being equipped with sensors.
    > Surveillance cameras, mobile phones, sensors in vehicles, smart
    > meters, and the upcoming ‘Internet of Things’ – tiny computers are
    > sitting in all these objects, datafying the world around us. We
    > can no longer control which information is recorded about us and
    > where.

2.  A computer will make copies of all the data it operates with, and so
    > the internet is basically a huge assemblage of copying machines.
    > In the digital world, practically everything we come into contact
    > with is a copy. This huge copying apparatus is growing more
    > powerful every year, and will keep on replicating more and more
    > data everywhere. We can no longer control where our data travels.

3.  Some say that these huge quantities of data spinning around have
    > become far too vast for anyone to evaluate any more. That is not
    > true. Thanks to Big Data and machine learning algorithms, even the
    > most mundane data can be turned into useful information. In this
    > way, conclusions can be drawn from data that we never would have
    > guessed it contained. We can no longer control how our data is
    > interpreted.

In other words, data we never knew existed will find channels that were
not intended and reveal information that we would never have thought of
on our own. And this is substantially changing the world.

My theses are highly controversial within the German digital community,
not least because they unveil the irretrievable end of privacy and are
thus threatening one of the main pillars of a shared canon of values.
But I haven’t been entirely alone with this discourse: Christian
Heller’s concrete ideas pertaining to a post-privacy world,[^4] as well
as the formation of the ‘privacy-critical alliance’ Spackeria,[^5] have
in recent years repeatedly led to heated debates within the German net
scene.

## The Book 

Over the past four years, I had occasionally thought about turning my
increasingly extensive body of reflections on the digital information
tailspin into a book. But somehow, the final incentive was missing. What
tipped the scale were Edward Snowden’s revelations in 2013.

The monstrosity of this gigantic project – nothing less than the
observation of the entire planet – made me realize just how small I had
been thinking until then. So far, I had regarded *Kontrollverlust* as an
everyday phenomenon that was still quite rare, but might impact one
person or another. That this loss of control had long become the
totalitarian reality of every single person on the internet did, in
fact, surprise me.

I’m certainly not the first one to regard this constellation as a ‘game
changer’: a shift in circumstances with the power to modify the
coordinates of the world and radically change the rules of the game. But
I may be the first one trying to formalize these new rules. The German
title of my book, *Das Neue Spiel: Strategien für die Welt nach dem
digitalen Kontrollverlust*, translates to *The New Game: Strategies For
the World After the Digital Tailspin*. The *10 Rules* you have in hand
are a modified version of the second half of the book.

## The Campaign

Writing a book about *Kontrollverlust* is one thing. It is another to
write it in such a manner that the concept matches its contents. If I
assume that data is uncontrollable, I can’t just go to some publishing
house and publish a book under the usual conditions of copyright. A
different solution had to be found. I devised a crowdfunding campaign
that allowed me to collect money before publication; enabling me to
write the book without any advance payment from a publisher.[^6]

The campaign cost a lot of time and effort, but it was worth it. Instead
of the 8,000 euros I had set as a target, I collected a total of more
than 20,000 euros, making the campaign the third most successful
crowdfunded German-language book project at the time. The edition at
hand is borne of this success: the translation of my *10 Rules* was a
so-called ‘stretched goal’, one to be realized in case I reached the
20,000 euro mark.

## The License

As part of the campaign, I designed a license for the book and the *10
Rules* in collaboration with *iRights.info*.[^7] The license is called
the WTFPDL, a derivative of the WTFPL, the ‘Do What The Fuck You Want To
Public License’.[^8] My extension basically consisted of inserting the
D, for ‘digital’. While the original license model literally permits any
conceivable use, my extended version grants this right in the digital
domain only. In the physical world, for printed books for example, the
digital license is not valid, and normal copyright applies instead.

In this respect, the WTFPDL license demarcates the fault line between
the Old and the New Game. In the Old Game – a world of walls, distances,
masses and bodies – the old rules apply: copyright laws. In the New Game
– a world in which data is freely copied and recombined – the loss of
control comes into full force, unrestrained.

The book, the crowdfunding campaign, the license, as well as the English
version of the *10 Rules*, are all part of the same work. All these
elements respond to the challenges of the digital tailspin in their own
way, and are intended as guidance to, or examples of, how the future
might look in the New Game.

So much for my history with *Kontrollverlust* – from this point on,
let’s follow the rest of the story together.

## Strategies {.strategies}

Technology neither determines social structures, nor does it govern our
actions. It defines a room for maneuvering that can be shaped
politically. Technology makes certain strategies more effective, and
sentences others to failure in the long run. Rather than giving
instructions, I want to examine why some strategies are less appropriate
in the New Game than others.

However, what constitutes a good strategy is not the same for all
players in the game. Our standpoint is one of an emancipatory global
civil society, which we are part of ourselves. From this position, we
can assess the situation and promote strategies that will enhance the
freedom of civil society while, at the same time, protecting the
disadvantaged.
