
# Rule 3: Knowing Is Asking the Right Questions 

*Proposition: In the Old Game, it was important who was storing which
information and to what purpose. But what counts in the New Game, by
that measure, is how information is retrieved. This shift of focus does
not only change our attitude towards knowledge, but also touches on the
power structures inherent in any kind of knowledge.*

A card designed by US media artist Evan Roth shows the Google landing
page, with the words ‘bad ass mother fucker’ typed into the search
field. A mouse pointer is pointing to the ‘I’m Feeling Lucky’ button,
the Google feature that takes users directly to the website that comes
up as the first result of a search. The card is essentially a set of
instructions in the shape of an image. If you follow the instructions
and enter ‘bad ass mother fucker’ on Google, it will take you directly
to Evan Roth’s website.[^21]

Roth concisely directs attention to the ways in which publicity changes
in times of the ubiquitous query. Assigning the term ‘bad ass mother
fucker’ to the artist only happens when external observers actively
search for the term. The more people follow the instructions and look up
‘bad ass mother fucker’, the more intimately Roth’s name becomes linked
to the phrase in Google’s algorithms. Of course, Roth had primed his own
website in advance in such a way that it would appear at the top of
Google’s list when queried for that particular expression – a practice
commonly known as SEO, or search engine optimization.

What is most interesting though, is that Roth does not participate in
this process of attribution himself. Because who would want to call
themselves a ‘bad ass mother fucker’? But by taking this detour, via the
Google algorithm and finally, via the Google searcher, this connection
becomes one that needs to be maintained and reanimated every time.

Roth’s work is a reflection on us – the audience. We are the ones who
are meant to perform a particular Google search, thereby feasibly
fabricating this particular reality ourselves. The reality of a search
engine query contains a very specific notion of ‘public’. This is not
the ‘public’ on the street, nor the ‘public’ of the tabloids. Instead,
there are many coinciding publics, ephemeral public spheres that pop up
momentarily, connecting any individual with a question to a search
result page. These *query publics* don’t generate an ‘audience’ in a
conventional sense – rather, it is the audience that is creating query
publics of its own.

Our world presents itself, more and more, in the shape of a question.
Nowadays, knowledge is rarely structured through inscribing,
prescribing, or ascribing activities (many of these are now automated),
but rather, through the query. We are constantly making enquiries of
Google, of Wikipedia, of YouTube. On our personal computers, the query
is slowly surpassing the structure of the file system.

But the question goes even deeper. The query determines what sort of
advertising we get to see, and gives us recommendations on what to buy
on Amazon. We can see the query at work every time we load our personal
default settings on any of our online services. Whenever content is
personalized and tailored to our needs, we have been recognized and used
as a query ourselves. Everywhere we go on the internet, advertising
sales companies turn *us* into items in one of hundreds of queryable
databases. Scientists exploring the world around them use increasingly
complex queries on growing amounts of information, and call that ‘Big
Data’. Then they present whatever they found out in their query reality:
about dark matter or traffic jams or the climate or the brain. Or about
us.

## Distributed Realities

In our Facebook timelines, there is a query pre-selecting the news of
the day for us. On Twitter, all the tweets from all the users that we
follow are displayed in a single chronological news stream. We have
configured our own queries by actively selecting those whose
contributions to our reality we value. Today, knowledge means that our
Facebook friends and Twitter followers explain the world to us, in their
terms.

My Twitter network is as distinct as my fingerprint, and my perceived
query reality, by extension, is equally unique. This agglomerate of
distributed realities is comprised of the status updates of all those
personally selected accounts, all those far-flung reality seeders. They
share their realities with me, and I aggregate them into my personal
query.

## The Filter Bubble

The first to point out possible dangers of the query public was Eli
Pariser. In his book, *The Filter Bubble*, he argues that our notion of
reality is increasingly determined by algorithmically filtered content,
and explains why he sees this as a threat. Google has become so highly
personalized, he states, that no two people would ever get the same list
of results.[^22]

Pariser finds these distributed realities problematic. He assumes that
we will only follow people with whom we entertain similar worldviews.
This selectivity threatens to lead to self-affirmative echo chambers,
reinforcing individual standpoints instead of challenging them. So
filter bubbles will tend to preserve your own point of view, and
insulate you from other opinions. According to Pariser, this undermines
the collective process of public dispute that is central to any
functioning democracy.

However, being confronted with the opinions of others was arguably never
a matter of free choice, but a matter of circumstance. Through the
query, it has never been easier to connect with like-minded peers from
all over the world, and at the same time, disconnect from opinions that
you reject. This can justifiably be described as a new form of
self-determination. And who has the right to call this new autonomy into
question? Or, in other words, to what extent is the democratic public
entitled to the attention of its citizens?

Also, bonding with others over particular shared interests does not
imply that you won’t be faced with more remote ideas and convictions in
other areas. Just because I share someone’s interest in robots, doesn’t
mean we have to agree on environmental policies. And just because
someone shares interesting links on economics, doesn’t mean that I share
their sense of humor. Query reality is much more diverse than that: you
can configure your filter bubbles so that they provide you with a whole
range of unknown, surprising, intellectually and ideologically
challenging realities, making it almost impossible *not* to expand your
horizon at least once a week. In fact, today, a much greater variety of
thought is accessible than ever possible in the old media world (which
itself has only ever served as a filter bubble – the filter bubble of
the mainstream), and we can make far more autonomous decisions about it.

Pariser’s critique of the lack of algorithmic transparency in
personalized services like Facebook is understandable. Creating your own
filter bubble is one thing, but a filter that users can only partially
influence, or don’t notice at all, is an entirely different matter. You
can hardly call it self-determination if your demand for information is
left up to mechanisms you cannot control.

## Strategies {.strategies}

There is no better tool for organizing knowledge than the query. This is
true for a range of distributed realities, from newsfeeds to search
engines to Big Data. However, we need strategies that can deal with new
threats, and make the great potential of the query visible at the same
time.

### Civilian and Activist Big Data

In the US, data analysis has long been used to understand (and combat)
poverty and inequality. Roland Fryer and Steven Levitt, for example,
used extensive data analysis to show that differences in school test
scores between ethnic groups had social causes, and no biological
foundation – a common racist misconception.[^23]

In 2011, it was revealed that Apple Inc. had, for 18 months, contested
the release of US Department of Labor data on workforce diversity in
California. Apple was harshly criticized by civil rights groups for
refusing to disclose information on the ethnic composition of its
staff.[^24] Imagine for a moment that a large German company would come
up with the idea of storing an attribute like ‘race’ in employee files,
and would then pass this data on to the state. The public outrage in
Germany would be unprecedented. In the US, exactly the opposite is a
cause for concern. Arguably, without data and its analysis, problems
like lack of diversity and similar ‘invisible’ issues are more easily
overlooked. That is precisely what is happening in Europe.

Costanza Hermanin and Angelina Atanasova criticize exactly this point in
their article ‘Making “Big Data” Work for Equality’.[^25] Especially in
Europe, there is very little public data on the effects of everyday
racism and ableism in the labor market, which, they argue, makes it very
difficult to compare diversity data from Europe with data from the US.
With their ‘Equality Data Initiative’, the authors have tried to contend
these policies, but are regularly met with resistance. Privacy, of
course, serves as the main counter-argument here.

Jane R. Yakowitz Bambauer pointed out that it is society itself that
suffers the most from restrictive data management. In her paper,
‘Tragedy of the Data Commons’,[^26] she highlights the fact that open
data is a major source of social welfare. With all the restrictive data
protection rules limiting this source, she argues that the issue bears
similarity to the famous ‘Tragedy of the Commons’: the problem of
selfish participants overexploiting a common good. Her implicit
conclusion is that data retention is somewhat egoistic behavior.

Germany’s Open Data City[^27] is one of the few positive examples; a
trailblazer in harnessing the political power of data analysis. This
small, Berlin-based company mostly offers data processing for German
news media, thereby giving the topics discussed a greater range and
political impact. One of their first great successes was the
visualization of mobile phone connection data belonging to the German
Grünen politician Malte Spitz, which he had obtained by suing his
telephone provider Deutsche Telekom.[^28] Using interactive graphics,
Open Data City was able to show the quantity of detailed information on
the politician’s behavior this data might yield. Their mash-up map makes
the seemingly abstract dangers involved in government-side data
retention all the more visible. You can track Spitz’ movements through
Germany, for instance, and see any phone call he made in the meantime.

Another example is Open Data City’s interactive ‘Secret War’ map.[^29]
For this project, they collaborated with German public broadcaster NDR
and major newspaper *Süddeutsche Zeitung*. The ‘Secret War’ project maps
the locations of secret CIA, NSA and BND sites and gives further
information on clandestine activities. You can follow prisoner
transports, drone flights, and other covert operations launched from
specified locations in Germany.

There is still more than enough room for projects like this. Data
analysis should be encouraged beyond the economic and academic sphere,
and in the activist sphere in particular. Key algorithms like MapReduce,
and database programs like Hadoop are available as open source software,
thus affordable for all. It is important to reduce misgivings and
increase practical knowledge. At a professional level, hardware costs
are indeed considerable, but even with regular hardware you can achieve
some impressive results.

### Filter Sovereignty as Self-Determination

Previously, a range of factors such as geography, political
affiliations, socio-economic background, language, or financial means,
determined which information we came into contact with. Today, most of
these factors have been mitigated, and it is possible, at least
theoretically, to provide everyone with all kinds of information. Today
we can simply choose the information most relevant to us from an almost
infinite realm of data streams. In that sense, filter bubbles are the
expression of this new form of self-determination, facilitated by
technology – an illustration of our right to reduce the complexity of
the world according to our own criteria, and to interpret it
accordingly.

In Germany, with its freedom of information laws, a comparable legal
right already exists. Article 5 of the German Constitution distinguishes
*positive* freedom of information – the right to inform oneself ‘without
hindrance from generally accessible information sources’ – from
*negative* freedom of information, which is meant to protect oneself
from ‘inescapably obtrusive’ information.

The query, by way of technology, enhances the potential of both the
positive and negative variants of freedom of information. This extended,
‘queryological’ approach to self-determination is what I call *filter
sovereignty*. Filter sovereignty is the right to query, the right to
filter content, the right to use public data, and the right to ward off
intrusive or unwanted information. We will encounter this concept again
further on in a modified form.

Positive filter sovereignty is the right to analyze all information
sources through personal queries, while negative filter sovereignty
allows us to opt out of certain sources, again using our own filters. In
this sense, the filter bubble that you construct on Twitter by actively
following accounts, is far more autonomous than Facebook’s more obscure
news stream. In terms of filter sovereignty, more transparency certainly
wouldn’t hurt Facebook.

The query, as a driver of the digital tailspin, will keep increasing in
importance, and so will the potential of filter sovereignty. Since we
can assume that the power of the query will only increase over the next
years, filter sovereignty is becoming a core strategy of antifragility.
*Kontrollverlust* won’t impair this in any way: on the contrary, it will
only further enhance the reach and prevalence of autonomous filtering
strategies. This is where our most pessimistic predictions regarding
informational self-determination meet the more positive potentials of
informational freedom. To choose filter sovereignty is to leave the
sinking ship of privacy, and construct a society based on a form of
self-determination that is reinforced, not weakened, by
*Kontrollverlust*.
