
# Rule 7: The State Is Part of the Problem, Not Part of the Solution

*Proposition: As in the Old Game, we are still accustomed to identify as
being part of a state that protects us from life’s adversities. In the
New Game, however, the state itself is affected by the loss of control,
and pursues its own agenda. And that runs counter to the interests of
civil society.*

Just a few months after the first Snowden leaks, the following phrase
started popping up everywhere: ‘We need our own network
infrastructures.’ Who this ‘we’ was referring to, however, seemed to
oscillate between ‘we Germans’ and ‘we Europeans’.

The conservative daily *FAZ* repeated its calls for a European search
engine. It let experts explain how important it was, now more than ever,
that Germany, or at least the European Union, would finally build its
own net infrastructure, and it did not tire of laying part of the blame
for secret services’ surveillance on platform operators like Facebook
and Google. Rene Obermann, former head of German telecommunications
provider Deutsche Telekom, called for a statutory ‘Schengen Routing’ in
November 2013, mentioning a ‘Schengen Cloud’ as a set target in the same
breath. The 1984 Schengen Agreement was the contractual groundwork that
first abolished border controls between different European states, and
was later merged with European Union law. But what Obermann was
suggesting almost thirty years later was the closing, not the opening of
borders. The general idea was to configure European internet routing in
such a way that routes of information transfer that left the Schengen
territory would be avoided, even if they were cheaper.

At the same time, a number of German email providers, including 1&1,
Strato, Web.de, T-Online, Freenet, and GMX, started the ‘E-Mail made
​​in Germany’ campaign.[^46] Providers pledged to exchange email only
via encrypted connections. Furthermore, they emphasized the safety
benefits that would come from hosting servers only in Germany, thereby
subjecting them to German data protection laws. On the German-speaking
web, these proposals have since been parodied under the hashtag
‘Schlandnet’ – a mixture of ‘Schland’, the football game chant version
of ‘Deutschland’, and ‘ChinaNet’, a common term for China’s highly
regulated and monitored national web infrastructure.

This was not too surprising in itself, as it was essentially an easy
promotion campaign to give German companies some competitive edge. But
the important question of how providers could increase the level of
security for their users remained unanswered. It would certainly be
welcome for German providers to finally draw level with international
safety standards. But an interface called ‘Lawful Interception’, that
grants secret services and other authorities direct access to servers,
is still required by law, as in other countries. Of course these
all-German email services still include the interception gateway. In
this sense, encryption between servers may be well-intentioned, but is
of little use as long as intelligence services and others are still
given access to stored data.

The most important internet exchange point in Germany is DE-CIX. This
network node is where all German and international providers trade their
data. Distributed over 18 data centers in Frankfurt, DE-CIX is the
biggest internet node worldwide, in terms of traffic. At peak times,
traffic reaches rates of up to 3.2 terabytes per second. Essentially,
there is hardly any German internet traffic that does *not* pass through
here. This is also the place where the Federal Intelligence Service,
BND, taps into the wires. According to documents obtained by news
magazine *Der Spiegel*, the BND is allowed to record up to 20 percent of
total traffic.[^47] If you bear in mind that these masses of data can be
reduced, for instance by filtering out spam emails, or by storing only
the link addresses of data-intensive content like YouTube videos or
pornography, but not the content itself, then 20 percent is actually
quite a lot. Maybe even everything of importance. And we now know that
the BND trades this data on a large scale with its US counterpart, the
NSA.

Of course, Germany or the EU could seal itself off in informational
terms. But then you would still have to explain why it is preferable to
be wiretapped by the German BND or the ‘*Verfassungsschutz*’, rather
than by the Americans, especially if the data is made available to the
NSA anyway.

What is really being attempted with these ‘Schlandnet’ approaches is
something else. It is an attempt to connect to an old narrative that has
little to do with reality today: the good old ‘us vs. them’ thinking of
20th century nation states, which the world – and the intelligence world
in particular – has in fact long outgrown. Since Snowden, it has become
common knowledge that the world of intelligence is an immense and finely
woven mesh of shared technologies and joint databases, assertively
facing the claims to power of individual nation states.

No EU privacy reform, no review of ‘Safe Harbor’ agreements, no Schengen
routing, and no European search engine project, funded with no matter
how many billions of euros, will protect us against networks that
operate inside Europe, with the blessing of our own governments. The
enemy is neither the United States, nor the NSA, nor Google – the enemy
is lying in our bed and laughing out loud about our plans to snuggle up
alongside it.

The ultimate goal of ‘Schlandnet’ and its apologists is a
re-nationalized, insular European internet, which could thereafter be
regulated, finally, with border controls, data retention measures, and
automated law enforcement. Of course, all this could then be subjected
to even higher volumes of surveillance, which would fit in well with the
narrative of the arms race of international intelligence. Is that really
what Edward Snowden intended?

## Anti-Net Politics

‘Schlandnet’, data retention, web blocking policies, abolishment of net
neutrality, ancillary copyright laws, the ‘right to be forgotten’,
DE-mail, user-unfriendly and unrealistic ideas on protecting minors, and
tightening copyright laws… Experience has shown that, what in Germany is
called ‘*Netzpolitik*’, i.e. internet policymaking, is almost
exclusively *anti* net politics. There is not much use in repeatedly
blaming the issue on politicians who are supposedly too ignorant, too
old, or not tech-savvy enough. It is time to acknowledge that the
problem is systemic.

But the systematics here are not too hard to pinpoint: boundless
networks of people, information, and algorithms are by now questioning
the states’ claims to power on a daily basis. Like it or not, the state
and the internet are so difficult to reconcile structurally, that they
are grating against each other more and more violently. The internet and
the state have become systemic competitors. Whenever politicians talk
about the internet as a ‘legal vacuum’ (Christian-democratic party CDU)
or about the ‘primacy of politics’ (social-democratic party SPD), they
are implicitly raising the systemic question.

*Kontrollverlust* profoundly affects the state and its institutions,
politicians included. That the state keeps its secret services on such a
long leash is understandable, as intelligence is the only state-owned
tool that is a match for the internet at all. Unlike states themselves,
intelligence services can increase their monitoring powers in accordance
with Moore’s Law, and by way of international collaborations, profit
from network effects that are unthinkable for individual nations. It is
a dangerous game the state is playing, and its outcome is uncertain. We
can be sure of one thing though: in terms of internet politics, the
interests of the state contradict those of civil society.

## Strategies {.strategies}

Dealing with the state is quite tricky at this stage. The state, we can
be sure, still has a lot of power; it can enforce policies within its
boundaries, and negotiate new rules at the international level. The
state still sees itself as an ambassador of civil society, which isn’t
entirely wrong, provided your thinking is still defined by national
boundaries. It’s a fact that we are still greatly dependent on the
assertive powers of the state, even while it is the state that has
increasingly become the problem. Nation states, with their institutions
and stakeholders, are inevitably biased towards the world of
geopolitics, which is precisely what needs to be transcended. In
strategic terms, we need to strike a balance between working with state
power wherever necessary, while promoting its resolution at the same
time.

### Recognizing Interests

In the New Game, all the cards are being reshuffled. Extremely powerful
institutions and individuals stand to lose a lot of their authority. It
is therefore imperative that we identify the relevant stakeholders and
their respective interests.

Newspaper publishers are frantically struggling to survive, and their
prolonged crusade against the internet is not in the least altruistic.
Hackers tell us that we only need adequate encryption and everything
will be fine again, while simultaneously operating companies that sell
crypto and security technology. Deutsche Telekom wants us to purchase
their services with our dear money, while second-rate German email
providers are sensing opportunities to one-up competitors abroad. And
the government applauds all these ideas in the interest of business
development, safeguarding jobs, or, if nothing else, safeguarding its
own powers – and then casually lets still more funds pass for the BND
and *Verfassungsschutz*. Surveillance, in this regard, is taking place
less between individual states, and more between top and bottom: between
the power elites and their populaces.

We’ll have to admit that net politics is only possible against the
state, not with it. Whether the issue is surveillance, censorship,
political transparency, privacy, copyright, or just the emancipatory
internet use of civilians, in all these cases the state is something of
a natural enemy to civil society. It is time for us to identify
ourselves, instead, as part of an international civil society, and to
interact and practice solidarity accordingly. An answer to the conflict
of states and institutions and their populations can only be found
internationally; that is, beyond the policymaking of these institutions
or, if necessary, against them. The global protests against ACTA and
then TTIP were a good start. They have shown how a global network of
activists can form and take joint action, recognizing the international
entities who regulate these trade agreements as their political
opponent.

### The State as Platform

When the German Pirate Party celebrated its first big success in 2011,
and entered the Berlin parliament with 8.9 percent of the votes, many
were puzzled about their strange political ideas. Their demands sounded
as if they had just combined various unrelated claims of random
do-gooders: legalization of drugs, free public transport, voting rights
for foreigners, unconditional basic income. All that sounded good
enough, somewhat left, and somewhat liberal, but observers were stumped
trying to pigeonhole the Pirates within the usual political spectrum in
Germany, or even identifying a recognizable political attitude at all.

What these baffled onlookers did not understand at the time was that the
party members, who as a group primarily socialized on the internet,
regarded this public infrastructure as a platform in itself, and hence
instinctively aimed at making it platform neutral (see Rule 6). So the
free, or more accurately ‘ticket-less’, public transport system the
Pirates proposed, is effectively a non-discriminatory way of moving
passengers about, independent of income and intensity of use. Likewise,
they demanded that educational resources should be available for all, in
equal measures. Suffrage for foreigners who live in Germany implies that
the Pirates perceive democracy itself as an infrastructure, hence the
advocacy for non-discriminatory, open access to its structures. Even the
call for a more consistent separation of church and state can be read as
a demand for platform neutrality. Why should the infrastructure of the
state favor Christian data packets over Muslim or atheist data packets?

Another of the Pirates’ claims, the concept of an ‘unconditional basic
income’, deserves a closer look. If you take the economic foundation
needed for an individual to survive to be a *precondition* of the
possibility of equal participation, rather than something accomplished
with government support only when needed, then the ‘unconditional basic
income’ model becomes mandatory. An unconditional basic income could
serve as a non-discriminatory economic platform, where everyone would be
at liberty to communicate on equal terms. This makes the entire concept
one of the most significant demands for platform neutrality, while also
providing a means of strengthening the individual against
*Kontrollverlust* by increasing overall robustness.

This line of political thought is not limited to the Pirate Party, but
can be found in contemporary internet activism as well. If we are to
work with, and around, the state, we have to do exactly the opposite of
‘Schlandnet’: we need to turn the state into a platform, disempower its
centralized control systems, and transform it into an egalitarian
infrastructure of social participation.

### Post-Nationalism

The state is forcing us to rethink net politics, even beyond the net.
This calls for another step towards policies that are essentially
anti-’Schlandnet’ in nature. Instead of re-nationalizing the internet,
we need to overcome national boundaries through our networks. If goods
and information can flow without any border controls today, why can’t
people?

If we want to curb the dangers of surveillance by combating the penal
system (see Rule 2), then the border of the nation state is exactly the
place to start. This is about more than a German author’s admittance to
the US, or asylum for Edward Snowden. The infamous ‘Fortress Europe’ is
a draconian nightmare of state surveillance, with deadly consequences
for thousands of people. Compared to the 23,000 who have died or gone
missing on their way to Europe since the year 2000 alone,[^48] the
Berlin Wall fatalities seem like tragic singular cases.

National boundaries need to be gradually eliminated, immigration
controls need to take place according to verifiable international
standards, and in the long term, we will need an international human
right that protects freedom of movement. It’s going to be challenging to
discuss this with politicians, who are bound to the nation state by
design. Rather, this debate requires a decidedly transnational agenda of
a truly global civil society, which is aware of the conflict of
interests it has with its own heads of state.
