

# Rule 2: Surveillance Is Part of the Game

*Proposition: Surveillance will notably increase in the New Game, and we
will reluctantly learn to deal with it. Effective action against
surveillance will mean mitigating its effects. *

They were exciting times, the early 1980s. Highly political times too,
in the Federal Republic of Germany. Major policy shifts, such as the
controversial construction works at Frankfurt airport (‘Startbahn
West’), the stationing of intermediate-range missiles, and changes in
nuclear policies, had spawned a variety of social movements in Germany
that were becoming increasingly vocal in protesting what had, in their
mind, become an increasingly repressive state. And then the population
census came. Its opponents managed to mobilize fellow campaigners far
beyond the range of usual suspects from the peace and environmental
movements. By March 1983, there were more than 500 citizens’ initiatives
working on the topic, and public opinion was starting to swing.

The German Federal Constitutional Court had already halted the census
project with an injunction order in April 1983, but it still took until
December 15 of that year before the Court repealed the entire census law
as being unconstitutional. In the course of this landmark decision, the
Court also decreed a new fundamental right: the right to ‘informational
self-determination’. This was directly derived from Article 1 of the
German Constitution (‘Human Dignity’), and its associated fundamental
human rights. Since that day, the right to decide on modalities of
publication and usage of personal data has not only become the legal
basis of German privacy laws, but also a deep-seated cultural
cornerstone of Germany’s self-conception.

Thirty years later, in September 2013, the Germans elected a new
parliament. Again, these were exciting times, and again, it had
something to do with data collection. Four months before, Edward Snowden
had launched his first revelations about secret NSA and GCHQ espionage
programs. The German public learned the hard way that literally no one
could make claims to ‘informational self-determination’ any more. The
whole world was wiretapped, all the time and all over the planet, and
everyone was affected. But while the news media were falling over
themselves reporting and clarifying, while internet activists could
hardly stop hyperventilating, while the greatest privacy disaster
imaginable was taking its course, the general public seemed to take
little interest in the matter.

In Germany, the conservative party CDU, which had responded to the
scandal in the most graceless and sedate manner imaginable, actually
ended up gaining votes in the general elections, while the other acting
government party at the time, the liberal FDP, that had shown at least
some interest in a fact-finding investigation, was voted out of the
Bundestag. The opposition parties, trying to use the scandal as
political leverage against the government, were not rewarded either. The
German Pirate Party, whose core topics include privacy and surveillance
issues, failed again to enter parliament, garnering only 2 percent of
the votes.

So here’s the bad news: neither state-aided, nor economic, nor private
surveillance is going to be overturned in any way. The right to
informational self-determination, hard won thirty years ago with so much
verve and pathos, has been fundamentally damaged, and everyone is
carrying on pretending nothing happened.

## The Privacy Paradox

The outcome of the German elections calls to mind a phenomenon that
scholars have termed the ‘privacy paradox’. The paradox lies in the
observation that, in surveys and interviews, privacy is always mentioned
as being extremely important to respondents, while at the same time,
this rarely prompts people to do the slightest thing about it.

For a study[^15] into the matter, researchers created two fictitious
online shops. One of the shops demanded less personal data from their
customers, but the DVDs on sale cost one euro more than in the second
shop, which wanted to know a lot more about its customers. Almost all
users picked the cheaper store. Even when the prices were the same in
both shops, only half of the subjects chose the privacy-friendly
variety. Apparently, we are not willing to pay a price for privacy. The
costs of privacy are virtually zero. Although we keep insisting on how
much we care about our data, it obviously is little more than lip
service – a mantra that is socially accepted, but devoid of content:
‘privacy is important!’

## Echelon and Moore’s Law

That the NSA was eavesdropping on satellite phone connections worldwide
was known as early as 2000. Its global network of radio stations and
radar domes was called ‘Echelon’. The European Parliament called for an
investigation, but when the enquiry commission submitted its report on
September 5, 2001, it was overshadowed by the events of 9/11 a few days
later. Apart from Echelon leaving deep traces in the collective memory
of nerd culture, virtually nothing happened – this was a scandal that
was to remain without political consequence.

Even ‘post-Snowden’, no political, technical, or legal solutions to
surveillance are forthcoming. On the contrary, surveillance will likely
keep on spreading, parallel to the datafication of the world. What was
monitored at the time of Echelon was the same as it is today:
everything. Only before, ‘everything’ was less extensive than today by
several orders of magnitude. What *can* be put under surveillance *will*
be put under surveillance, i.e. the digitized areas of life. These areas
are subject to *Moore’s Law*, meaning that their capacities will double
every 18 to 24 months.

The digital tailspin has only just begun. And it will continue to sink
into every nook and cranny of daily life, leaving no corner undigitized.
So when in ten years’ time the latest eavesdropping operations of
intelligence are revealed, we might hear of brain scanners, or of
sensors tapping into our bloodstreams. Either way, people will shrug it
off again, or maybe not even that, as their thoughts on the issue will
be publicly available anyway.

Our digital lives have been monitored, not just occasionally or
recently, but continuously for the past ten years. That means that if
total surveillance were as much a risk to personal freedom and
individuality as digital rights activists have been suggesting for a
long time, no one in the Western hemisphere would be able to feel free
or individualistic any more. In other words, the question of whether we
can live with total surveillance has already been answered in a way that
is by no means hypothetical, but decidedly empirical: yes, we can, and
we have been doing so for more than ten years.

## Surveillance Is a Danger

Although many of the dramatizations and horror scenarios have turned out
to be exaggerated, surveillance – state surveillance in particular –
remains a social problem as it is still a danger to democracy and
community. J. Edgar Hoover is a key witness to this effect. The first
director of the FBI amassed files on everything and everyone, and had
soon collected enough material to blackmail practically all the powers
that be in US politics. Hoover was invulnerable, and under his guidance
the FBI turned into a state-within-a-state.

Even if it may not be its foremost concern, we can safely assume that
the same is true for the NSA. In contrast to the FBI of old, the NSA
does not only hold material about US politicians. It has, at least in
theory, the ability to compile compromising material about MPs,
politicians, and diplomats from all over the world. The intelligence
apparatus is indeed a threat to democracy, and globally so.

For many people, surveillance is a very real danger. Spying technology
enabled the drone wars in Sudan, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. One false
correlation, say you were at the wrong party, or spoke to the wrong
people on the phone, and you might find your house in ruins, or worse.
Refugees at the borders of the European Union are becoming victims of
surveillance on a daily basis. ‘Eurosur’ is the European border
monitoring system for early detection of illegal immigration, consisting
of satellite tracking systems, drones, and other recon technology, as
well as a scheme for data exchange between the border authorities of the
respective member states. Already today, security agencies like Frontex
are fighting immigrant streams with high technology.

Even in Germany, it is not too hard to be caught in the crossfire of
overzealous officials, especially for politically active individuals.
This is what happened to Andrej Holm, an urban sociologist with a focus
on gentrification, who was held in custody for weeks, and although
innocent, stayed under observation, along with his entire family, for
months. Both the German Federal Criminal Police Office, BKA, and the
*Verfassungsschutz*, the Federal Office for the Protection of the
Constitution, have time and again tried to infiltrate and demoralize
left-wing activist circles with intimidation and investigations.

State surveillance, however, is hardly limited to the intelligence
sector. Its repressive traits are far more commonplace than that.
Recipients of social benefits in Germany (‘Hartz 4’), are bullied with
compulsory levies of their personal data. They have to disclose all
their property, are required to expect unannounced house calls, and
provide evidence of their efforts to find a job. The constant pressure
of being monitored, combined with the threat of losing existing support
from the employment agency, is enough to wear anyone down after a while.
So there are still many specific dangers, and good reasons, to be cited
against surveillance, and which is why it is still important to contest
it.

## Strategies {.strategies}

The strategies aimed at containing surveillance directly have failed.
And while there is the occasional message of success (such as the Court
of Justice of the European Union toppling the Data Retention Directive
in April 2014), total surveillance is now the default setting – a
permanent state that we need to deal with. There are, however, some
segments in which surveillance can still be successfully contested.

### The Fight Against Surveillance Should Be a Fight Against the Penal Systems

The formula of ‘surveillance leads to dependency, no surveillance leads
to independence’ is no longer accurate in this generalized form.
Surveillance does not endanger freedom per se. We are not dealing with
an abstract, binary condition that is simply switched on or off. We need
to acknowledge that surveillance is a far more concrete relationship,
involving at least two parties.

When scandalizing surveillance, we tend to focus mostly on the aspect of
observation. We merely ask how pervasive the observation is that we are
subjected to. Assessing the threat potential of the NSA, Amazon, or even
online advertising companies, only on the basis of how much knowledge
they have about us is short-sighted, as then we overlook the importance
of power relations. Surveillance is not identical to power, but power
lets observation become surveillance.

These power relations are not in themselves the result of surveillance –
of course, already in place. On the one hand, surveillance is a symptom
of these relations: a certain status or position is required in order to
monitor someone in the first place. On the other hand, surveillance can
be a tool in this power relationship: it is used to secure and reinforce
power. In both cases, the power dynamics were already there. In both
cases, this is precisely the point where mere observation turns into
systematic surveillance.

Although we are now aware that Google may be forwarding our data to the
NSA, we have no qualms, for instance, in sending private information to
friends via Google Mail. To use an analogy, although passersby could
notify authorities if they noticed you violating parking rules, you
would do it in front of them anyway, but maybe not in front of a police
officer. Risk is a concept that is perpetually calculated and
recalculated, taking into account the likelihood and intensity of
expected punishments. In the same way that we distinguish between a
resident and a police officer noticing our illegal parking, we can
differentiate between Google collecting our data to show us
advertisements, and the BKA collecting our data because it suspects us
of a crime.

Those with power over me are those who can discipline me. Punishment
does not always involve physical violence. Social ostracism, deprivation
of love, or even a disparaging look can all have equally disciplining
effects on my behavior. It is not until the observers hold me
accountable for my actions, that I will experience their observation as
a restriction of my liberty as such. The power to punish those not in
compliance with the observers’ expectations makes all the difference
between observation and surveillance.

For that reason, surveillance should not be equated with privacy. When
German writer and anti-surveillance activist Ilija Trojanov was denied
entry into the United States in 2013, it was because of his public
statements, not because of details from his personal life.[^16] In
Hamburg, stop-and-frisk police controls have been targeted at people of
color in particular, as part of the efforts to monitor the motions of a
group of refugees from Lampedusa. This is generally called ‘racial
profiling’. Skin color is clearly no private matter. The British
tourists who made a joke on Twitter about wanting to dig up Marilyn
Monroe, and were then interrogated for hours by US border
officials,[^17] didn’t owe their mistreatment to any violations of
privacy. Homosexuals can try to keep their sexual orientation secret to
avoid discrimination, but is that the kind of world we want to live in?

To the observers, it makes little difference whether they call you to
account for a public tweet, or for a private email. What matters here is
the consequence, not the origin of the information. Even if there was
such a thing as an intact private sphere, it could only protect us from
repression if we were to retreat into privacy entirely; taking all our
potentially objectionable characteristics and opinions with us. If we
were to make these opinions public, we would be in trouble anyways.
That’s not what I call freedom.

So instead of trying to defend privacy against surveillance, we should
be fighting institutionalized punishment. Authoritarian border controls,
racist police cohorts, homophobic social structures, inequality in
health and welfare systems, and institutional discrimination are the
true danger zones in terms of surveillance. Above all, the state itself,
with its monopoly on force and its sweeping claims to regulatory
authority, is the source of most of the threat scenarios that *do*
jeopardize freedom by way of surveillance.

### Counter-Surveillance

Trevor Paglen, an artist and activist from New York, practices his very
own form of counter-surveillance. Many of his projects make the secret
activities of intelligence more tangible. He has, for instance, located
secret agency bases and taken pictures of reconnaissance satellites. He
collects rank insignia and documents their iconography, or tracks the
routes of CIA aircraft on their way to detention camps. He makes all
information he collects publicly available. His work may not grind the
maneuvers of the intelligence apparatus to an immediate halt, but it
does restrict their freedom of action. The effects of surveillance work
the other way around as well: if secret services have reason to fear
that their activities could be discovered, recorded, and publicized at
any time, they might modify their behavior accordingly.

Surely two of the best examples of the power of transparency are Chelsea
Manning and Edward Snowden. Both Snowden and Manning have impressively
shown that the information tailspin works towards the side of the
whistleblower. No matter how powerful an authority or a nation may be,
if its power is founded on secrecy it will remain vulnerable and, if
anything, will only become more fragile in the future.

Counter-surveillance has already produced some substantial results in
recent cases of abuse of police power in Germany, for instance. In 2009,
a protester at the annual anti-surveillance march ‘Freedom not Fear’ in
Berlin was beaten up by police. After police officials had simply denied
the accusations and claimed that the perpetrators couldn’t be
identified, they had little left to say in the actual trial when
confronted with conclusive evidence in the form of multiple video
recordings from different camera perspectives. Two police officers were
later charged with assault.

In July 2013, criminal charges against Lothar König, a German
anti-fascist activist and vicar, were finally dropped. He had been
accused of inciting unrest and violating public peace during a
demonstration in Dresden. But again, videos from the event surfaced in
the course of the trial, severely contradicting the representation of
events by the police. Today, Lothar König is a free man again.

We have long perceived data collection as evil, because it is by way of
data that we arouse suspicion. Data can incriminate us, and even take us
to jail. But this is only one side of the story. We have a limited
perspective on data precisely because, for the longest time, data
processing had been the exclusive domain of powerful institutions – the
state and big business. But today that is no longer the case: for the
past few years, we have all been collecting, sharing, and processing
more and more data, and every day, we collect a little more.

In its most radical form, this trend is called *sousveillance*. The
expression was coined by US researcher and inventor Steve Mann, who for
the past 36 years has been experimenting with wearable gadgets in order
to continuously record his sensory perceptions. He was the prototypical
Google Glass user, as it were, long before Google even existed. The term
*sousveillance* is derived from the French word ‘sous’, for ‘under’ – it
describes a way of watching the watchmen, bottom-up.

Thanks to recording equipment getting smaller and less expensive,
*sousveillance* had already become an anti-surveillance strategy before
the launch of Google Glass. In 2007, police forces in Quebec, Canada,
underwent structural reforms after a video on YouTube had exposed
plainclothes police officers mingling with the crowd, intent on
escalating a demonstration as ‘agents provocateurs’. Another video,
showing UCLA students being tasered by Los Angeles police without any
prior provocation, had similar political repercussions. Likewise, the
\#OccupyWallStreet protest movement notably amplified in traction and
popularity immediately after a number of videos and photographs
documenting police violence against the movement began circulating
online.

### Post-Privacy: Transparency as a Stoic Exercise

In his book *Post-Privacy: Prima leben ohne Privatsphäre*
(*Post-Privacy: Living just Fine Without Privacy*),[^18] Christian
Heller embraces an even more radical strategy. He argues that it is time
to say goodbye to privacy altogether and to embrace the inevitable:
transparency. He highlights, amongst other points, the fact that privacy
as we know it today is a relatively new form of coexistence in
historical terms, and one that has not only been advantageous. The
private sphere has, for the longest time, been the place of the
oppression of women, for example. Contrast this with the gay rights
movements, which were among the first to show how social progress can be
achieved by making ultimately personal information ​​public. Since we
are unable to halt technological progress, we better get used to the
idea of total transparency, says Heller.

Heller himself acts this idea out in practice. He documents all of his
daily routines, his finances, and large amounts of highly personal
information in a publicly accessible wiki.[^19] It is easy to dismiss
this as a self-indulgent discovery trip, but Heller is undeniably
radicalizing an issue that has become the norm, in social networks
anyway, i.e., the fact that formerly private matters are explicitly
being made public.

Unlike many Facebook users, for example, Heller doesn’t deceive himself.
He is highly aware of the fact that his data can be used and abused, by
anyone, at any time, for any purpose. In this sense, post-privacy as a
strategy complies well with Nassim Nicholas Taleb’s dictum of
antifragility. Post-privacy is a practical exercise in stoicism: basing
your assumptions on the worst case scenario – in this case, that all
information is public by default – will not give you a false sense of
security, but rather will allow you to make plans in such a way that,
should this worst case actually occur, you will not be confronted with
unsolvable problems. If you keep in mind that all data is accessible, in
one way or another, this can actually reduce anxiety – one of the more
negative effects of surveillance.

### There Is No More Privacy, Only Encryption

‘Encryption works. Properly implemented strong crypto systems are one of
the few things that you can rely on,’[^20] Edward Snowden said in a Q&A
session organized by leading British newspaper *The Guardian*. Of all
the fragile strategies of data control, strong encryption is probably
the least objectionable. End-to-end encryption does not require you to
trust an external service provider, or even the state, to protect your
data. You only need to trust the technology to make sure that nobody can
decrypt the information exchanged between you and whoever you’re
communicating with. The mathematics behind encryption algorithms are
still considered to be bulletproof. Even with yet inconceivable
supercomputers, it would probably still take thousands of years to
decipher a single email.

The issue therefore is less about mathematics than about the
implementation of encryption software into email programs, servers, or
chat clients. Many dangers lurk: data can be retrieved in plaintext
before encryption, or after decryption. There has been a long line of
bugs and backdoors purposefully introduced by hackers or intelligence
agencies. That makes encryption particularly suitable for those who are
willing, and able, to acquire a lot of knowledge and skills. In this
sense, it is a very ‘elitist’ solution. The need to resort to encryption
is not something you’d wish for, but if you do have to rely on
confidential communication, encryption is probably still the best, or
maybe the only, way to fashion any semblance of privacy on the internet.
