# Rule 5: You Are the Freedom of the Other

*Proposition: Connecting via the query makes social communication
structures shift more and more towards end-to-end communication. We need
a new information ethics to reflect this change.*

The Old Game relied on central mediators: the bank, the library, the
authorities, newspapers, corporations, and universities were the ones
deciding exactly who was to receive which information and when; the ones
making ​​choices about data processing for many others. In the New Game,
we can recognize just how patronizing this approach is, and try to
conquer it.

Like *Kontrollverlust*, the query public is defined primarily by being
unpredictable. A given dataset can back up all sorts of conclusions,
depending on what first prompted the query. The as-yet-unknown question
is what finally structures the information – the query public is
inconceivable in the sense that it always resides in the future.

The least bad attempt to define that grave word ‘freedom’ is through the
distinction between negative and positive freedom. Negative freedom is
the ‘freedom from’ – from violence, starvation, political persecution,
etc. This is a sufficiently concrete and coherent definition. If we are
victims of circumstance, forced into actions that run counter to our own
intentions, we can instantly agree that this is exactly what constitutes
a lack or deprivation of freedom.

The concept of ‘positive freedom’, by comparison, is more difficult to
grasp. Positive freedom is the ‘freedom to’ – to do what wouldn’t be
possible without extra opportunities. This is commonly paraphrased as
‘enabling’. For instance, modern transport technology enables me to
travel to the American continent in a matter of hours, spanning a
distance not even kings used to be able to conquer. We gain positive
freedom by creating new opportunities: expanding our range, increasing
our efficiency, or refining our control mechanisms, for example.

It is not primarily the internet that provides these freedoms; we also
give them ourselves, to one another. The internet and the query are
merely what connect us, end-to-end, or rather ‘from one person to the
other’. We are the ones generating the news, opinions, texts, and data,
which may or may not be useful to others. As we are part of this
infrastructure ourselves, we become suppliers of positive freedom to
others, and part of their mental exoskeleton. Accordingly, end-to-end
communication makes us immediately responsible for the positive freedom
of others. This is an ethical constellation that was pioneered by French
philosopher Emmanuel Levinas.[^40]

Levinas’ concept of ‘the Other’ breaks down the ethics of the community
to an ethics of the counterpart. In this sense, Levinas personalized the
social sphere, reducing it to its most basic components: the
relationship to, and the responsibility for, the Other. At the same
time, the Other always keeps this somewhat abstract quality of the
unknown, unknowable, and un-ownable. The Other is a Black Swan, an
unforeseen event. On these terms, the Other is structurally analogous to
*Kontrollverlust* and the query: Levinas’ Other is always radically
Other, and so the Other will always disrupt any preconceived notion we
have of this Otherness. We can never truly know what the Other wants,
and this ignorance, according to Levinas, should not only be endured,
but in fact gives us responsibility as well; the responsibility being
the obligation to *respond*, to answer to, the Other.

You are the source, the hub, the database, and the interface of the
Other. Your existence, your data, and your offers of communication,
co-determine the Other’s freedom. Declining to join a certain platform
limits the Other’s freedom of using it. Not providing an encrypted
channel prevents the Other from communicating with you securely.
Deleting online content restricts the Other’s querying privileges.
Finally, suppressing certain kinds of information may constrain the
Other in as-yet unknown ways. Pre-emptively responding to the Other
should be seen as an act of hospitality.

## Strategies {.strategies}

The best strategy for end-to-end communication is to adhere to the
ethics of the Other. The Other’s filter sovereignty starts with the
transmitter.

### Filter Sovereignty as Information Ethics

When the Prussian politician Friedrich Althoff issued his decree
concerning German public libraries in the early 1900s, quite a few
librarians were shocked. Althoff was one of the coordinators responsible
for a major consolidation of the German library system, the original
goal of which was to compile a catalogue with all the books in the
associated libraries. To regain control of the vast amounts of material
in stock at the time, Althoff was prepared to resort to drastic
measures. In his edict, he suggested that the archives be pruned of
older dissertations, programs, textbooks, popular literature with no
scientific value, nature and travel accounts, and many other items. Most
libraries complied with the order, but the university library in Kiel
sent the following reply:

> The individual merit of a book is commonly assessed on the grounds of
> the intellectual sophistication informing it, and since, from this
> perspective, the scale is unlimited both towards the top and the
> bottom, its evaluation may well drop to the point of utter
> worthlessness, and often enough it does. This changes when we
> acknowledge that every book could just as well be treated as a
> historical document, in the broadest sense, and as soon as it is part
> of a library collection, indeed should be treated as such. For a
> library, every book has at least relative value, which may decrease,
> increase, or remain the same, and apparently also disappear
> altogether, even though the issue of value becomes quite clear seen
> from this angle […]. So even the most insignificant and trivial of
> works may increase in value and significance […]. Therefore, we can
> regard it as the duty of every public library to preserve […] the
> entire collection of books in its totality.[^41]

What the defiant librarian aptly indicates here is that the
classification of all these books was driven by one specific question,
namely whether the information it included was beneficial to readers.
But that question could have been posed quite differently: what
historical knowledge might we still find hidden in any old pulp novel?
Which notions of love or romance could we explore? We simply don’t know
which other queries could be directed at the same material. The Other
will come along and ask some question we weren’t expecting. Hospitality
does not mean to fob others off with what is most convenient for us. To
be hospitable is to explicitly grant the Other this quality of
strangeness and Otherness.

In the German edition of Wikipedia, this contradiction regularly leads
to heated debates among the authors. One faction, called the
Exclusionists, regularly calls for certain Wikipedia articles with too
little ‘relevance’ to be deleted. The Inclusionists, on the other hand,
will, in case of doubt, prefer to keep articles, even when they have no
apparent relevance. The fact that, for the query public, relevance is no
longer an objective or universal attribute, but more a matter of
individual assessment, is something the Exclusionists do not
acknowledge. Instead they insist on detailed notability guidelines. If
an article does not comply with the rules, it is discarded. As a result,
the German Wikipedia tends to include fewer contemporary or pop-culture
phenomena than its English counterpart, which follows a more inclusive
policy in this regard.

The point is the following: first, if we no longer need to justify the
existence of information due to the affordability of storage space; and
second, if we assume that the number of queries applicable to a certain
dataset is basically infinite, then there is no legitimate authority
that could decide for us just how important or irrelevant, how good or
bad, a piece of information is. To this effect, the setup and
maintenance of individual queries and filters is the exclusive, radical
right of the inquirer.

At the same time, these countless, and hence unpredictable, queries also
liberate the sender. The query relieves us of the pressure of meeting
expectations – the Other, working with infinite sources and perfectly
customized tools, can no longer make demands of the author, neither in
the moral-normative, nor the topical or informational sense. The freedom
of others to read or not read whatever they like is, at the same time,
the freedom of the senders to say whatever they like.

### Encryption as Hospitality

Interestingly, the same applies to encrypted communication, which also
obeys end-to-end principles. Asymmetric encryption generally means that
the message you want to send will be encrypted while still on your
computer (or mobile phone), and will be decrypted only once it has
reached its recipient. End-to-end encrypted data is impossible to
decrypt ‘along the way’, e.g. while on your service provider’s email
servers. This distinguishes it from so-called ‘transport encryption’,
where a message is encrypted only on its way from the source to the
server, and then again between the server and the recipient – on the
email server itself, the message will briefly be accessible in
unencrypted form. In such a case, authorities can make server operators
divulge this unencrypted data with a corresponding court order.

End-to-end encryption will usually employ the *public key* method. A
pair of keys is generated using sophisticated mathematical algorithms.
You keep the private key to yourself and make the other one public. When
you write someone an encrypted email, their approved public key is used
to encrypt it. But the recipient will need ​​their own private key to
decrypt the message. So you need to provide your public key before
someone can send you encrypted messages. A pattern is recognizable here:
providing a public key is an act of hospitality towards the Other.
