
# Rule 0: Everything Stays Different

*Proposition: In the New Game, many timeworn certainties have been
rendered invalid. In order for us to understand and profit from new
opportunities, and identify new threats, we need to actively unlearn the
old, and engage with the new wholeheartedly.*

First things first. The rule preceding the rule. Programmers commonly
start counting at zero, instead of at one. Zero is the blank slate; the
empty set that makes sure we do not yet know where we are going. Because
normally, we will already be somewhere, we will have preconceptions, and
that is precisely the problem. Therefore, Rule Zero. Before we begin, we
first need to take a step backwards, away from the first step, away from
our misconceptions, and go back to zero.

If the problem at hand were only the uncertainty of the future, it
wouldn’t be half as bad. That is something we can handle, something we
don’t need a rule before the rule for. The problem, of course, is that
we are human. We believe that we can make assumptions about the future
based on our experiences in the present and the past. We tell each other
stories, extrapolating their meaning into the future, and use
statistical analysis to calculate the probability of events. We
anticipate trends and develop scenarios, perform risk analysis and
determine the likelihood of disasters. We are perpetually consulting the
past in order to predict the future. What could possibly go wrong?

Researcher of randomness and former financial analyst Nassim Nicholas
Taleb alerted the world to the major role of unpredictability in his
2007 book, *The Black Swan*.[^9] In his book, Taleb demonstrates how
rare and improbable events, typically not covered in any plan or
scenario, have repeatedly become major turning points in history,
frequently with disastrous effects. To paraphrase Donald Rumsfeld,
former US Secretary of Defense: in addition to the knowns and the
unknowns (which we know that we know nothing about), there are also the
‘unknown unknowns’ – those unexpected items that we don’t even know we
should know about. This is what the eponymous ‘black swan’ refers to:
before the European exploration of Australia in the 17th century, no one
in Europe even knew that black swans existed, since local everyday
observation suggested that ‘white’ was one of swans’ defining
properties. So when black swans were finally documented, this was
clearly a turning point in terms of swan research, moreover, an event
calling the entire concept of swans into question.

Taleb calls this specific arrogance regarding the future the ‘Platonic
fallacy’. We are prone to confuse the theory, the model, or the abstract
idea with the thing itself, provoking a false sense of security. We
believe we have some understanding of the outside world, but in fact,
our supposed wisdom distorts our worldview. Another distortion that
Taleb explores is the ‘narrative fallacy’, which allows us to
rationalize random events by incorporating unrelated facts into our
stories in retrospect.

What is new always happens unexpectedly. We do not notice what is going
on, mainly because we have no idea what we are looking for. Change comes
to the world largely undetected, will only gradually gain traction, and
is, by definition, beyond our control. So let us try to liberate
ourselves from our prejudice against the new, and forget what we once
thought was true. Let us scrutinize everything, take nothing for
granted, and distrust those who claim to have ‘known all along’. In the
New Game, the rules have changed so fundamentally that many aspects need
rethinking. In such situations, a certain reluctance to get off the
beaten track is quite natural. But what was good before may suddenly
turn stale. What used to promise freedom could be a new kind of prison
today – or vice versa.

## The Empire Strikes Back

‘Institutions will seek to preserve the problem for which they are the
solution’, Clay Shirky memorably once said.[^10] We live in a world
today where the music industry is one of the greatest obstructers of
music distribution. In its quest to suppress the online exchange of
music (something that for all intents and purposes could be feasible for
everyone at low or no costs), the music industry has tried to exploit
any legal and promotional leverage it could find. The sector has a
history of filing lawsuits that have ruined entire families, locking up
videos on video platforms, and censoring search results and the internet
at large. Currently, the greatest enemy of music on the web is the music
industry itself.

The news media seem to be up in arms against the informed public now
too. In Germany, corporate publishers and news outlets lobbied and
lobbied until the (subsidized) public broadcasting system was finally
forced to oblige. Public broadcasters are now only permitted to make
their content available online for a certain time. News items will
usually disappear from the web after seven days. *Depublizieren*
(un-publish) is the peculiar term coined specifically to refer to this
practice of rendering published content, largely financed by the German
public through license fees, inaccessible again. The news media even
managed to lobby their way into federal legislation with the infamous
*Leistungsschutzrecht*, an ancillary copyright law specific to German
corporate publishers. With that, news media are basically trying to cash
in on search engines via legislation, all the while profiting from the
attention and publicity that their content gets through Google and
others.[^11] Fearing its own demise, the press has now become one of the
worst enemies of the public.

We should start to purposefully distrust the old. The old ways will
always consider themselves indispensable. The old will always try to
prove that, without it, the decline of the West, or democracy, or the
world in general, is nigh. It would be a mistake to listen to the ones
losing out in this situation of upheaval. We must be wary of placing the
individual cases of a privileged few above the common good. And we must
avoid sacrificing the opportunities of digitalization to a past that,
anyway, will never return.

## New Threats

If you take such a dispassionate look at this disruption of the old, you
are quickly accused of being a naive internet utopian, expediently
choosing to see only the good parts. This is not the case. To recognize
the new as being new, and to stop mourning the outmoded, does not
necessarily imply that change needs to be celebrated uncritically. Quite
the contrary. There are many new hazards brewing in the New Game. But
alarmists, instead of observing the situation closely and articulating
legitimate criticism, tend to obstruct our view of the real challenges.
That is to say, the challenge at hand is not just the demise of the old.
We do not need to worry about there being no more music, or no more
journalism.

It is evident that change not only yields new opportunities, but also
brings new dangers – dangers that are not recognized as such, precisely
because of their novelty; these new threats are black swans. We need an
unclouded view to be able to recognize them, just as well as the
opportunities. The struggle so far has not been between utopians and
realists, but rather between realists and nostalgics. The New Game has
already begun, it is already changing the world, and change is already a
reality. It is time to leave the mourners behind.

## Strategies {.strategies}

Developing strategies against your own biases means closing certain
doors, and opening others. It means leaving your accustomed standpoint
and taking an unusual stance. Two strategies can help here.

### Sinking Ships

In his book *Digital Renaissance*, the literary scholar Martin
Burckhardt suggested that when dealing with the digital shift, we should
adhere to a lesson provided by Spanish conquistador Hernán Cortés. As
soon as his expedition had arrived in South America, he sank the ships
they had come on, right in front of his crew. That would leave them with
no hope of ever returning to the old world – and with a blank slate
providing the mental state for them to engage the new continent.[^12]

Figuratively speaking, we need to demolish all hope of returning to the
Old Game. The New Game is clearly not paradise on earth, is not
inherently better than the old, but it is exciting and full of
opportunities. New worlds entail risks that differ from those dragons of
old. By mentally detaching from our old world, we can free our minds to
those new opportunities and challenges, as well as risks, that await us
in the New Game.

### Looking Back at Today

One interesting way of liberating our understanding of the present from
the adhesiveness of current experience was presented by German media
theorist Stefan Heidenreich. He invites us to participate in the
following thought experiment:

> Let’s try out the following to see what will become of our story.
> Imagine yourself in ten years, looking back at what is now the
> present. The year is 2020, and maybe you will remember this text you
> read or heard a decade ago, maybe not. Maybe you were traveling. Maybe
> there is a picture that a stranger took of you on the street.[^13]

In the year 2020, face recognition algorithms will be ubiquitous, so we
will easily be able to reconstruct random encounters we had on the
street. We can determine who else has read the same text, because we
will all have left our digital traces. We will know a lot more about the
past – that is, about today – than we know about our past today. But
when we look back even further, we are taken aback:

> Looking further back into the past, into the years 2009, 2008 or 2007,
> you will find the light cone of data fading. You will find yourself on
> the verge of a zone of darkness you no longer have access to. You may
> vaguely remember some of the data points beyond this light cone. But
> recalling the unlit past will seem increasingly tedious, because you
> know nothing for certain and can’t check the details in any of the
> archives. This means that we are already in the process of leaving
> this area of darkness now, in our current years.

In other words: our future selves will experience a similar feeling of
gloom assessing our present as we might, for instance, when looking at
the Middle Ages today. And in much the same way as we can barely
understand today how people used to live in a feudal system, our future
selves will not understand why some of us were so strongly opposed to
the light.
