
# Acknowledgements

Many of the ideas presented here were developed over a number of years
and in constant exchange with others on the net. More so, the entire
project rests on the shoulders of many, as it was realized with a
crowdfunding campaign. The writing of this book would have never been
possible without the help of a number of people.

I’d like to thank Geert Lovink, and the Institute of Network Cultures in
Amsterdam, for allowing me to publish an international version of my
thoughts.

Many thanks to my translator, Anwen Roberts, for rendering my work into
concise English and to my editor Valie Djordjevic, who has repeatedly
nudged me back onto the track of legibility. It has been a great
collaboration.

A big thank you to the ‘beta readers’ who endured – and improved – my
half-baked notes and outlines, especially Leonhard Dobusch, Caspar
Clemens Mierau, and Jürgen Geuter.

Sincere thanks to Mark Wirblich and Maria Thaens, who afforded me
shelter in their agency Bytes Brigade; the most beautiful office in
Neukölln. Special thanks to Jörg Leupold, who in the past six months of
madness spent those rare moments of spare time with me, and helped me to
regenerate.

My gratitude to everyone who supported me in setting up the crowdfunding
campaign and helped with the campaign video. I would particularly like
to thank Mate Steinforth (camera), Gerlinde Schrön (editing), and Mark
Wirblich for the original cover design.

And last but not least, my heartfelt thanks to all the crowdfunders who
donated their money and trust, and without whom this text would not have
been possible at all.

*Yet as we unleash living forces into our created machines, we lose
control of them.*

Kevin Kelly


