
# Rule 9: And the Final Boss Is… Us!

*Proposition: The biggest adversary of civil society is neither the NSA,
nor the platforms, nor the state, but civil society itself. We will have
to learn to live together, to address social problems collectively, and
to take on a lot more responsibility. *

In the Old Game, the individual could rely on the centralized order of
the institutions, and would therefore only occasionally be bothered with
the complexity of the world. With this frame of reference, it was easy
to confuse freedom with the illusion of self-reliance: to be free was to
be independent.

With the forfeiture of informational self-determination, this notion of
freedom is rapidly losing significance. As the German philosopher Antje
Schrupp has repeatedly pointed out, our prevailing concept of freedom is
based on a male-dominated ideology of privilege.[^55] The illusion of
self-reliance can only be maintained if the conditions of this
self-reliance are kept ​​invisible. For instance, when housekeeping and
childcare were taken care of, the patriarch could assure himself of his
own autarchy, turning a blind eye to his wife’s work, or his
personnel’s, without a thought. Even though today we are far beyond
patriarchy in its initial form, we still tend to assure ourselves of our
autarchy by painstakingly overlooking the infrastructural parameters of
our lifestyles, and by taking them as a given. In contrast, the internet
reminds us constantly that we are part of a social fabric, and highly
dependent on social infrastructures. This prospect is not always pretty,
and imposes a responsibility on us that we were previously able to shift
on to higher institutions.

If we try to paint a rough picture of the next ten to twenty years,
we’ll see that neither the intelligence services, the state, nor even
the centralized platforms will pose the greatest challenges. The final,
end-of-level boss in the New Game is not one of the strong players of
the Old Game. Rather it is us, ourselves, who have to take on the
challenge of making do without them.

## The Final Boss Is Not the State

The power of the state is notably decreasing even today, and in matters
of internet policy, it has already made itself dispensable as a dialogue
partner. State institutions will be increasingly and effectively
circumvented in the future, and politicians will accept it without
objection. The state will not disappear entirely, but fade into the
background. Institutionalized politics, meanwhile, is trying to weave
the old order into transnational and European-level governance, and can
be expected to have some success with this mission. We should be
vigilant and careful not to trust the state too much, and if necessary,
directly challenge its claims to control. A ‘final boss’, however, looks
a bit different.

## The Final Boss Is Not the Secret Service

The influential status of intelligence today appears to be more or less
independent of the state’s waning importance. At first glance, secret
services appear to be on a drip feed from their respective governments.
But in fact, they have been crafting a global meshwork of largely
self-sufficient and self-referential structures which are not going to
disappear any time soon. Intelligence has become an international
platform of secret knowledge, and in the New Game, espionage will still
be playing an important – and probably unpleasant – role. However, the
secret services are severely endangered by *Kontrollverlust* themselves,
and in such a way that their inner workings and activities are
systematically called into question. There is credible evidence that
Edward Snowden is not the only whistleblower supplying the public with
classified information. Most likely there is a second anonymous
source,[^56] and some observers already speculate about a third
informer.

NSA, GCHQ and BND are accumulating greater intelligence and data
analysis capacities by the hour, but their modus operandi is fragile.
The informational tailspin ensures that now their operations are less
undisturbed than before, and the climate of mutual suspicion within
their own organizations numbs their efficiency. While intelligence still
remains a force to be reckoned with for civil society, it is not its
main opponent.

## The Final Boss Is Not the Platform

Platforms already have a firm grip on our lives, and this development
can be expected to spread even further. In the future, we will arrange
virtually everything via the platform. Without question, this will
afford them an immense power base. Platforms will continue to expedite
concentration and monopolization, and they will continue to do politics
by way of exclusion and manipulation. And we will not just approve of
this, but actually demand it – and despise them for it at the same time.
Platforms are making themselves irreplaceable to us, and our dependency
on them will relentlessly force us to accept essentially unacceptable
conditions, even though we should try to induce political counter
pressure.

But we mustn’t be so gullible as to imagine Facebook and Google as the
incoming platform rulers of the world. They are merely early insignia of
a new paradigm that is only just unfolding. The day we log on to their
far more powerful successors, we will find that their current supposed
power was a mere joke in comparison.

Of course, there will also be new approaches of decentralization, aimed
at dispersing the power of the platform rather than monopolizing it, and
promoting inter-operational standards and open source technology. It is
to be hoped (and technically quite feasible) that an open,
decentralized, ‘social network layer’ can be developed, as a kind of
add-on to the internet. This would then be able to replace a large
portion of Facebook’s current functionalities and provide a more open
kind of access to essential forms of online communication. But we
shouldn’t be too hopeful in this respect. Centralized, closed source,
platform monopolies, with their thirst for profit, will still have more
than enough space in the New Game, as long as we don’t abolish
capitalism in the meantime. They are not going away, because their
investment facilities are still greater, their scaling effects stronger,
and their innovation and development cycles shorter than what can
presently be achieved with common standards and open source.

Platforms are set to become the most important centralized power
stations in the near future. But for a ‘final boss’ they are too
volatile, and far too dependent on us in return. After all, their
livelihood ultimately depends on how much power we are prepared to grant
them.

## The Final Boss Is… Us

We are not quite ready yet. Most of us are still stuck firmly in the
20th century and refuse to acknowledge the rules of the New Game.
*Kontrollverlust* makes us nervous, and it is due to this anxiety, this
loss of familiar routines, that we demand to be shielded from it. And so
we call upon the state to protect us: from platforms, from intelligence
services, and so on. Then we demand that these same services protect us
from other secret services, or from terrorists. And finally, we call
upon the platforms to protect us, from one another, from the state, and
again, from the secret services.

We are essentially aware of the contradictions in our various claims
here, but have internalized these expectations. We have learned that we
are asserting our so-called rights to make these demands, but ignore the
fact that we are dealing with separate players and conflicting
interests. Unfortunately, this approach puts us in jeopardy ourselves:
we are encouraging those we fear, and happily relinquishing our tools of
self-determination. This strategy is eventually doomed to failure, and
at worst, may even lead to an uncontainable imbalance of power.

Meanwhile, we are particularly unable to cope even with ourselves. We go
along with shitstorms, intent on tormenting each other – hey, it’s free
of charge. We provoke others, and let ourselves be provoked. We escalate
a quarrel here and wage a mock fight there. ‘Someone is wrong on the
internet!’[^57] is our battle cry. We like to display our intolerance of
the lifestyles, convictions, cultural backgrounds, and principles of
others, and are rarely willing to inform them of our point of view
before berating them.

Let’s face the facts: Digital tools have empowered the individual – and
civil society. We have all gained more opportunities: to communicate and
affiliate with others, to assert our interests, to organize ourselves.
Sadly, we seize these opportunities in order to prevent one another from
making progress. The NSA may, in theory, have the power to pressure,
intimidate, and terrorize each and every one of us. This is exactly what
happens to a lot of people who are silenced on a daily basis – not at
the hands of the NSA, but at the hands of trolls, ‘Men’s Rights
Activists’, Nazis, and other misanthropes.

In this respect, the perpetual drama on the web has at least some
purpose. Unresolved societal problems are behind almost all of these
points of friction – problems that existed before, but were more easily
concealed in the Old Game. On the internet, there is always a
sufficiently critical mass of people to be found who consider a specific
grievance to be outrageous enough to denounce it. Getting them together
may be hard work, but it is usually a good solution. Social progress
only works this way.

We will carry on hurting each other for a while, until we finally
realize that these new digital tools can only cause so much distress
because they have given us new means of control. In a word, we have
gained powers that we have not yet learned to wield: powers that are
inadequately regulated, offer very few effective control mechanisms, and
for which we have, so far, barely developed any cultural practices. Our
true final boss is our inability to see ourselves as actual
beneficiaries of these powers.


## Strategies {.strategies}

So how do you fight yourself? Preferably in such a way that you are not
too badly mangled in the process. But that doesn’t help. Under the
end-to-end paradigm of the New Game, everyone has to take on more
responsibility. Otherwise, the others will take over: the platforms, the
secret services, the nation states. And that would probably not end
well.

### Politics of Empathy

The liberal / libertarian model of freedom as independence and
self-reliance is finished. It may take some time, though, before certain
people recover from this insult to humanity and realize that it actually
yields new liberty: the positive freedom of connectivity, interaction,
and involvement. Freedom, however, that comes at the price of greater
responsibility. In his column ‘Connected’, the computer scientist and
internet scholar Jürgen Geuter writes:

> The Internet is a network, therefore it replicates human coexistence
> much better than many people care to admit. And the intrinsic value of
> a network does not lie in the sovereignty and independence of its
> nodes, but in their connectedness, and the emergent behaviors that
> result.[^58]

As part of a network, we can benefit from these network effects, but
then we need to take more responsibility for the network itself. In the
New Game, nothing we do is unpolitical anymore. We are role models all
the time, for better or for worse. We become politicians ourselves, as
soon as we complain about the sorry state of affairs, as soon as we
speak out against racism, sexism, or homophobia. But we are also acting
as politicians whenever we spread this kind of hostility. The internet
is not the regulars’ table, we should quit the pub talk and realize that
we are already operating in the query public of Others. All of our
actions serve as an example, and are, in this sense, inherently
political.

The lack of transparency in the Old Game let many of us go about our
business unperturbed, despite the massive social problems that
surrounded us. Clearly, the internet has not caused hatred and
animosity, but it is there that they are most simply represented. And it
is from there that this hate will be spouted back at us. In the New
Game, it won’t matter what you know, but rather what you are willing to
learn. Life in the network calls for much more empathy than in the Old
Game. In this regard, empathy means the willingness to engage with the
views of the Other.

Empathy also implies a willingness to enrich the network with our
contributions. Connectivity is not opposed to individuality – instead,
our individuality augments the network and is what ultimately makes it
attractive. The value of every node in the network is then defined
precisely through its distinctiveness. In the New Game, your challenge
is to make the world a better place, because of you.

### Learning to Fly

On February 20, 2014, the Canadian photographer Joey L. receives a
Twitter message from Anthony Kurtz. He doesn’t know Kurtz in person,
only from Twitter. Kurtz asks whether he was in India in 2007 – seven
years ago. Puzzled, Joey L. replies that yes, he had been to India: in
Varanasi, a historic town on the Ganges river, frequented by pilgrims
and tourists. The stranger sends a picture taken back in 2007, and asks
whether that is him. The photo is a long shot of the historic buildings
on the banks of the Ganges, as seen from the river. There are a lot of
people in the image: boats filled with locals lining the shore, women
sitting on the steps leading down to the river, people strolling along
the promenade. Two of these – tiny figures in the photo – are apparently
tourists. Joey asks for the high-resolution original and other photos
from the set, and Kurtz sends those along as well. There, if you zoom in
close enough, you can see Joey L. walking along the banks. The photo was
taken on October 18, 2007. At the time, Joey was just 17 years old.

Then, on one of the images, he discovers himself taking a photograph of
two women who are sitting nearby and drawing. He recovers the photo that
he must have taken in that moment. His own image, in turn, shows the
Ganges in the background, with all the boats from which people are
taking their own pictures. One of them had to be Anthony Kurtz. There
are many ways to respond to *Kontrollverlust*. Joey L. writes an ardent
blog post about his experience, and is delighted at how the internet has
shrunk his world: ‘I Was Hidden on this Guy’s Hard Drive for Over 6
Years’.[^59]

In the future, these kinds of stories shouldn’t surprise us much. The
world has become transparent unto itself, simultaneously visible from
all angles. Is it any wonder, then, that two photographers take a photo
of one another taking a photo, and find each other over the internet?
You can tell this story as a lurid horror tale, or as a display of
collective mutual awareness.

Before air travel was invented, no one had probably ever imagined that
we would some day climb into tin cans that would take off into the sky.
Sitting in a chair, thousands of feet up in the air – what a loss of
control! And what a gain of control! Before the airplane, traveling to
India was something that was just not possible for the majority of
people. This was an invention that shrank the world, and without it, a
story like that of Joey L. and Anthony Kurtz never could have happened.

The New Game is an airplane, and we are already on board. It’s okay to
be scared, and the turbulence can be dangerous. But I think the flight
is worth it. It’s worth it in much the same way as boarding a plane and
stepping off into a new world on the other side.
